Breakpoints (#108)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/cortex-m-breakpoints.md

| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------ |
| `Z0,addr,kind`           | Add Software Breakpoint at `addr`    |
| `z0,addr,kind`           | Remove Software Breakpoint at `addr` |
| `Z1,addr,kind`           | Add Hardware Breakpoint at `addr`    |
| `z1,addr,kind`           | Remove Hardware Breakpoint at `addr` |

`kind` is architecture specific but for ARM it indicates what instruction to use. (The instruction changes depending on whether the MCU uses the ARM or Thumb instruction set).[^9]

> NOTE: The use of "software" breakpoint in GDB RSP is a bit of a misnomer. The gdb server can choose how to best install the breakpoint. For example, the server may opt to install a "software" breakpoint as a hardware breakpoint if there are still ones available.

### Debugging GDB Remote Serial Protocol

With that out of the way, let's take a look at the actual **GDB RSP** commands that get sent over the wire when we install a breakpoint. Conveniently GDB has a builtin debug command, `set debug remote 1`, which can be used to enable printing of every single command sent between the client and server!

> To facilitate breakpoint testing, I've created some test functions in the demo app `dummy_function_*` that we can install breakpoints on. We can use the `dump_dummy_funcs` CLI command to print information about them all:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To facilitate breakpoint testing, I've added `dummy_function_1` through `dummy_function_9` to my program so that we can install breakpoints on. I also added `dump_dummy_funcs` to the firmware CLI to print information about them all:
```

```
shell> dump_dummy_funcs
dummy_function_1: Starts at 0x240. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_2: Starts at 0x250. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_3: Starts at 0x260. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_4: Starts at 0x270. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_5: Starts at 0x280. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_6: Starts at 0x290. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_7: Starts at 0x2a0. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_8: Starts at 0x2b0. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_9: Starts at 0x2c0. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_ram: Starts at 0x20000000. First Instruction = 0x48024901
```

> 

Reviewer: Add a sentence about why you dump the address & first instruction, and maybe a code snippet (or link to code) that shows these are no-ops? In case someone wants to repro this.

#### GDB RSP while Setting Breakpoints

```bash
(gdb) set debug remote 1
(gdb) break dummy_function_1
Sending packet: $m80,4#35...Packet received: 2de9f341
Sending packet: $m240,40#93...Packet received:[...]
Sending packet: $m248,4#6b...Packet received: 2f730000
Sending packet: $m248,4#6b...Packet received: 2f730000
Sending packet: $m240,2#61...Packet received: 0149
Breakpoint 1 at 0x240: file stub_functions.c, line 4.
```

> We see some [`m` packets](https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/Packets.html#index-m-packet) (`m addr,length`). These are used for requesting reads of memory but no breakpoint commands?! Let's `continue` and see what happens:

Reviewer: Would be nice to add a sentence about why those reads happen.

```bash
(gdb) continue
Continuing.
(gdb) c
Continuing.
==> Sending packet: $Z0,240,2#aa...Packet received: OK
==> Packet Z0 (software-breakpoint) is supported
Sending packet: $vCont?#49...Packet received:
Packet vCont (verbose-resume) is NOT supported
Sending packet: $Hc0#db...Packet received: OK
Sending packet: $c#63...
```

We see a `$Z0,240,2` request issued which means "install a software breakpoint at address 0x240". This matches the address of `dummy_function_1` so that's what we'd expect! It looks like breakpoints are only installed when we resume.

#### GDB RSP when a Breakpoint Triggers

> Now let's actually cause the breakpoint to be triggered by executing the function we installed the breakpoint on. This can be done by running the `call_dummy_funcs` CLI command:

Reviewer: What does this do? Call them all in a row?

```
shell> call_dummy_funcs
[... GDB should have halted ...]
```

```bash
Sending packet: $c#63...Packet received: T05hwbreak:;thread:0000DEAD;
Sending packet: $g#67...Packet received:[...]

> Sending packet: $qfThreadInfo#bb...Packet received: m0000dead

Reviewer: A note on this `0000DEAD` address would be interesting

Author: I added a little note about it. It is interesting hehe
<img width="727" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7494333/84837839-08602600-b007-11ea-8454-4d8652f99b51.png">

- Number of Available Hardware Breakpoints can be computed by: `FP_CTRL[6:4] << 4 | FP_CTRL[3:0]`
- `ENABLE` turns on the **FPB** Unit when set to 1 and disables it when set to 0.

> NOTE: A write to the `FP_CTRL` register will only take effect if the `KEY` bit is 1. Otherwise, the operation will be a no-op.

#### Flash Patch Comparator register, FP_COMPn, 0xE0002008- 0xE0002008+4n

Comparators for breakpoints will always be `FP_COMP0` up to the number of supported breakpoints minus 1. Technically up to 127 hardware breakpoints can be implemented but usually only 2-6 are.

##### Version 1 Layout

![](/img/breakpoint/fp-comp-rev1.png)

`ENABLE` flips on the individual comparator and `REPLACE` controls the behavior as follows:

| Replace | Behavior                                                                         |
| ------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 0b00    | N/A - Used to enable Flash Patching                                              |

> | 0b01    | Install breakpoint on instruction at `'000':COMP:'00'`.                          |

Reviewer: I don't think this was super explicit that this means:
`0x000XXXXXXXXXXX00` where `X`s are taken from the value of `COMP`. Took me a second to understand.

Reviewer: What a dumb design... Can you think of a reason why they would have done it this way?

Author: I went with `'000':FP_COMP[28:2]:'00'.`. which I think is more explicit. I got confused initially too :)

Yeah, I can't think of a great reason for the layout. I think maybe someone was trying to be extra clever with the fact that arm has 16bit & 32bit instructions but even that isn't a very strong reason.

| 0b10    | Install breakpoint on instruction at `'000':COMP:'10'`.                          |
| 0b11    | Install breakpoint on instructions at both `'000':COMP:'00'` & `'000':COMP:'10'` |

##### Version 2 Layout

The Version 2 Layout is a little more straightforward. Bit 0, Breakpoint Enable (**BE**), controls whether or not the breakpoint is enabled:

![](/img/breakpoint/fp-comp-rev2-dcba.png)

Bit 31:1 is the address to break on:

> ![](/img/breakpoint/fp-comp-rev2-bpaddr.png)

Reviewer: Maybe a note on why this doesn't limit the address space (LSb is used to indicate thumb/ARM mode anyways and unaligned instructions are not supported).

Neat, they all worked so a breakpoint was installed for our flash-based function, `dummy_function_1`, that was missing from the FPB configuration.

Let's dump the functions to examine if any instructions were modified:

```
shell> dump_dummy_funcs
dummy_function_1: Starts at 0x240. First Instruction = 0x4802be00
dummy_function_2: Starts at 0x250. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_3: Starts at 0x260. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_4: Starts at 0x270. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_5: Starts at 0x280. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_6: Starts at 0x290. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_7: Starts at 0x2a0. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_8: Starts at 0x2b0. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_9: Starts at 0x2c0. First Instruction = 0x48024901
dummy_function_ram: Starts at 0x20000000. First Instruction = 0x4802be00
```

Aha, we can see `dummy_function_1` also was updated to include a breakpoint instruction, `0xbe00`. What's interesting here is this address is in the NRF52's internal flash space. This means to inject this breakpoint the flash page the address is in must have been reprogrammed.

> This is in fact exactly what happened. The SEGGER JLinkGDBServer implements a feature referred to in the docs as "unlimited flash breakpoints"[^11] which will patch flash regions the J-Link Software knows how to write to with `bkpt` instructions.

Reviewer: Could add a note that says "this means that the JLink software ships with drivers for all those chips since they are not standard".

Author: There's also QSPI parts with XIP they support by default too fwiw!

#### Flash Software Breakpoint Optimizations

To minimize the amount of times the flash sector has to be rewritten, the JLinkGDBServer will also perform some additional nifty optimizations such as caching the flash sector and not actually uninstalling the breakpoint when gdb requests. When a request to single-step over the breakpoint is actually made, the gdbserver will "simulate" the instruction execution. For example if we objdump our dummy function, we can see the instruction patched over, `0x4901`, is `ldr r1, [pc, #4]`:

```bash
$ arm-none-eabi-objdump  --disassemble=dummy_function_1  \
    example/breakpoint/build/nrf52.elf

build/nrf52.elf:     file format elf32-littlearm

Disassembly of section .text:

00000240 <dummy_function_1>:
 240:	4901        ldr	r1, [pc, #4] ; (248 <dummy_function_1+0x8>)
 242:	4802        ldr	r0, [pc, #8] ; (24c <dummy_function_1+0xc>)
 244:	f000 b966   b.w	514 <example_log>
 248:	0000732f    .word	0x0000732f
 24c:	00007315    .word	0x00007315
```

> From a debugger we could perform the `pc`-relative load into `r1` and increment the `pc` instead of re-flashing the sector with the real instruction so the hardware can execute it.

Reviewer: As mentioned, this is not clear at all. You should expand on it as it is super cool!

Author: tried to be more descriptive, lmk what you think!

| 0b11    | Install breakpoint on instructions at both `'000': FP_COMP[28:2]:'00'` & `'000': FP_COMP[28:2]:'10'` |

##### Version 2 Layout

The Version 2 Layout is a little more straightforward. Bit 0, Breakpoint Enable (**BE**), controls whether or not the breakpoint is enabled:

![](/img/breakpoint/fp-comp-rev2-dcba.png)

Bit 31:1 is the address to break on:

![](/img/breakpoint/fp-comp-rev2-bpaddr.png)

Note this is able to cover the entire 32-bit address space even though the bottom bit is used to
for **BE** because the bottom bit is used to convey whether the ARM or Thumb instruction set is
being used rather than encoding any address information _and_ instructions must be aligned by their width.

### Examining FPB Configuration

Recall that GDB will uninstall breakpoints when the system halts so this is a rare situation where we can _only_ debug the configuration on a running system!

The NRF52 includes a Version 1 **FPB** so from here on out our code examples will make use of that implementation. Here's a minimal snippet of code which can be used to dump the config:

> ##### C Code to Dump FPB Config

Author: A rare situation where you have to do it on device because they are uninstalled while GDB is halted so the FPB config will be blank
